slides.md, before:

% Designing and Developing Software for Operations
% Will Thames
% 25 July 2014

# Introduction

## Overview

* Discoverability
* Configurability
* Observability
* Resiliency
* Further reading

## Setting the scene

* 2+ years at Suncorp (2012&ndash;)
* ~8 years at Betfair (2003&ndash;2011)

## A little about Betfair

> * I left in 2011. Much will have changed.
> * 150+ applications
> * &hellip; not that many of which 'looked' the same
> * 1000s of transactions per second, all of which
    were supposed to complete in less than a second
> * 1000s of servers across multiple DCs

. . . 

Genuinely 24x7, highly transactional environment
with low tolerance for downtime.

## A terrible weekend

When Sam Newman tells you that microservices have
to be carefully designed, he's very right

A set of cascading failures across a suite of 
microservices contributed to doing 30+ hours of oncall
in a single weekend.

We came up with a list of 20+ improvements. 

This is a summary of some of those learnings!

## And Suncorp
I support a lot of third-party written software
so I have even less power to fix things. But that's 
what support tickets are for.

. . .

Or ranting&hellip; 

# Discoverability

## Standards

![http://xkcd.com/927/](images/standards.png)

## Standards

No support team should have to guess how software is setup.
Have organisational standards that declare:

> * How software is installed (chef, puppet, ansible, salt, cfengine &mdash; just pick one)
> * Where logs live
> * Where configuration comes from, and what the current configuration is
> * How to stop, start, interrogate status of an app

# Configurability

## Configuration Management
> * Terrible: configuration as part of the deployable
> * Good: separate configuration files read at startup
> * Better: configuration read from files after startup
> * Also good if well managed: configuration read from a service (e.g. etcd)

## The configuration monolith
> * Bad: one giant configuration file containing everything from 
    license keys and authentication tokens to configuration
    updated by user interaction at runtime (hi Jenkins and Go!)
> * Better: Configuration files tied to a particular purpose, 
    in an easily templated fashion (think linux conf.d structures)

----------------------
Special mention for this beauty buried deep in a file that
changes every version:

    <!-- Uncomment this to enable this particularly useful configuration
      <some>
        <arbitrary>
          <xml>Make stuff work here</xml>
        </arbitrary>
      </some> 
    -->

Particularly difficult to template or remove specific lines
in a way that works across releases

# Observability

## Logging

* Configure log rotation on a schedule
* Log in an unchanging timezone (UTC, or Australia/Brisbane rather 
  than Australia/Sydney)
* Logs should have a single specific purpose

## Application logs

* Exceptions should be exceptional. `AuthenticationException` when a 
  user mistypes their password is NOT exceptional &mdash; don't log a stack 
  trace for it &mdash; put it in an audit log if need be!
* Know your log parsing tools &mdash; writing information as key=value 
  pairs will save you from having to write custom parsers.
* Transaction IDs are great for tying together multiple logs, especially if 
  you can get them in your access log too.

## Access logs

* Access logs should contain the obvious (URL, status code, timestamp etc)
* Less out of the box, log: response time, user ID and *actual* IP address 
  &mdash; i.e. if it comes through a proxy or load balancer, log 
  `X-Forwarded-For` not apparent IP. 
* Be careful of timeouts &mdash; not all long running requests make it to the 
  access logs.

. . .

* If you can't use a widely-used access log format, make your access log 
  format standard across your organisation.

## Health status pages

* Health status pages can be used by loadbalancers and humans
* Make your loadbalancer checks be as complete as possible 
  (test connections to critical integration points)
* Make your loadbalancer health checks be as quick as possible
* Have a separate more verbose healthcheck page if need be 
  containing status of DB connections, queue lengths, request counts etc. 
* Allow the healthcheck to recalculate regularly(!!)

# Resiliency

# Further Reading

## Release It
In the last few weeks I've said I could write a book on this. Michael
Nygaard actually has

![](images/release-it.jpg)

## Continuous Delivery
Jez Humble and Dave Farley regularly makes the point that 
configuration management is one of the foundations of 
Continuous Delivery and have some great advice:

![](images/continuous-delivery.jpg)

## Netflix
Netflix are the poster child for designing and delivering operable 
software, telling the rest of us how they do it and sharing their
software!

[Netflix open source software](http://netflix.github.io/)

[Netflix blog](http://techblog.netflix.com)

# Conclusions

## Questions?

## Thanks

Slides are at [http://willthames.github.io/devopsdays2014](http://willthames.github.io/devopsdays2014)

Commit message:

Added adages slide and resiliency section

slides.md, after:

% Designing and Developing Software for Operations
% Will Thames
% 25 July 2014

# Introduction

## Overview

* Discoverability
* Configurability
* Observability
* Resiliency
* Further reading

## Setting the scene

* 2+ years at Suncorp (2012&ndash;)
* ~8 years at Betfair (2003&ndash;2011)

## A little about Betfair

> * I left in 2011. Much will have changed.
> * 150+ applications
> * &hellip; not that many of which 'looked' the same
> * 1000s of transactions per second, all of which
    were supposed to complete in less than a second
> * 1000s of servers across multiple DCs

. . . 

Genuinely 24x7, highly transactional environment
with low tolerance for downtime.

## A terrible weekend

When Sam Newman tells you that microservices have
to be carefully designed, he's very right

A set of cascading failures across a suite of 
microservices contributed to doing 30+ hours of oncall
in a single weekend.

We came up with a list of 20+ improvements. 

This is a summary of some of those learnings!

## And Suncorp
I support a lot of third-party written software
so I have even less power to fix things. But that's 
what support tickets are for.

. . .

Or ranting&hellip; 

# Discoverability

## Standards

![http://xkcd.com/927/](images/standards.png)

## Adages

> * Comment your code for the poor sucker who
    ends up reading it in six months time - it could be you.
> * Design your software for the poor sucker who
    gets called up at 3am. In a devops world it could be you.
> * Always code as if the person who ends up 
    getting called at 3am is a violent psychopath who 
    knows where you live.

## Standards

No support team should have to guess how software is setup.
Have organisational standards that declare:

> * How software is installed (chef, puppet, ansible, salt, cfengine &mdash; just pick one)
> * Where logs live
> * Where configuration comes from, and what the current configuration is
> * How to stop, start, interrogate status of an app

# Configurability

## Configuration Management
> * Terrible: configuration as part of the deployable
> * Good: separate configuration files read at startup
> * Better: configuration read from files after startup
> * Also good if well managed: configuration read from a service (e.g. etcd)

## The configuration monolith
> * Bad: one giant configuration file containing everything from 
    license keys and authentication tokens to configuration
    updated by user interaction at runtime (hi Jenkins and Go!)
> * Better: Configuration files tied to a particular purpose, 
    in an easily templated fashion (think linux conf.d structures)

----------------------
Special mention for this beauty buried deep in a file that
changes every version:

    <!-- Uncomment this to enable this particularly useful configuration
      <some>
        <arbitrary>
          <xml>Make stuff work here</xml>
        </arbitrary>
      </some> 
    -->

Particularly difficult to template or remove specific lines
in a way that works across releases

# Observability

## Logging

* Configure log rotation on a schedule
* Log in an unchanging timezone (UTC, or Australia/Brisbane rather 
  than Australia/Sydney)
* Logs should have a single specific purpose

## Application logs

* Exceptions should be exceptional. `AuthenticationException` when a 
  user mistypes their password is NOT exceptional &mdash; don't log a stack 
  trace for it &mdash; put it in an audit log if need be!
* Know your log parsing tools &mdash; writing information as key=value 
  pairs will save you from having to write custom parsers.
* Transaction IDs are great for tying together multiple logs, especially if 
  you can get them in your access log too.

## Access logs

* Access logs should contain the obvious (URL, status code, timestamp etc)
* Less out of the box, log: response time, user ID and *actual* IP address 
  &mdash; i.e. if it comes through a proxy or load balancer, log 
  `X-Forwarded-For` not apparent IP. 
* Be careful of timeouts &mdash; not all long running requests make it to the 
  access logs.

. . .

* If you can't use a widely-used access log format, make your access log 
  format standard across your organisation.

## Health status pages

* Health status pages can be used by loadbalancers and humans
* Make your loadbalancer checks be as complete as possible 
  (test connections to critical integration points)
* Make your loadbalancer health checks be as quick as possible
* Have a separate more verbose healthcheck page if need be 
  containing status of DB connections, queue lengths, request counts etc. 
* Allow the healthcheck to recalculate regularly(!!)

# Resiliency

## Fail safely
* Fail gracefully where possible. Know your failure scenarios!
* Fail fast - don't hold open threads for long periods

## Recovery
* When a healthcheck fails due to a dependency failure, ensure 
  that that dependency recovering means that the healthcheck to recover
* Ensure a service can start even in the absence of any dependencies.
  It might not be healthy (and indeed the load balancer should consider
  it unhealthy. But it should recover when the dependency recovers.

# Further Reading

## Release It
In the last few weeks I've said I could write a book on this. Michael
Nygaard actually has

![](images/release-it.jpg)

## Continuous Delivery
Jez Humble and Dave Farley regularly makes the point that 
configuration management is one of the foundations of 
Continuous Delivery and have some great advice:

![](images/continuous-delivery.jpg)

## Netflix
Netflix are the poster child for designing and delivering operable 
software, telling the rest of us how they do it and sharing their
software!

[Netflix open source software](http://netflix.github.io/)

[Netflix blog](http://techblog.netflix.com)

# Conclusions

## Questions?

## Thanks

Slides are at [http://willthames.github.io/devopsdays2014](http://willthames.github.io/devopsdays2014)
